---
title: Dystopia
date: "2021-06-27"
summary: "Dystopian 'W3C in 10 years' post, from July 2014"
tags: [
	"W3C",
	"History"
]
---

_This is the future. Where is the jetpack I was promised?_

_Unless you were born before the 1940s you were not promised a jetpack. You were promised a dystopian future. You're welcome._

<!-- more -->

## Introduction

In July 2014, several W3C Team members participated in an exercise to imagine W3C in 10 years time.

I chose to make mine a dystopian short story.
There are references at the end,
to indicate what sources I was extrapolating from.

## W3C in 2024

So it has happened. Today, the West World Webkit Corporation (W3C, a
"hosted by Google"™ Corporation) has closed the doors of it's California
headquarters and is no more. Before I turn out the lights, indulge an
old man some time to reminisce.

Firstly the name, which has changed a bit over the years. Some of you
may remember back to the time when there was a world wide Internet, on
top of which we built a Web. Of course it wasn't truly World Wide,
even then, though we liked to think it was; much of Africa and parts
of South America and Asia had little to no Internet access. But for
those parts that had, in many countries, it was possible for a private
individual to send or receive information from anywhere else in a way
that seems inconceivable now.

Many things caused that to change. The network infrastructure was
always US-based and US-oriented. Originally ASCII-only, it grew to
encompass Unicode and UTF-8 became deployed, then widespread, and
finally mandated. It seemed for a time that we had something the World
could use to communicate, in whatever language. There were some
hiccups, at one point in the early noughties it looked as if China and
Korea would deploy their own DNS just so people could type Web
addresses in their own language. That eventually happened, but not due
to character encoding.

The stimulus was the DNS root node being controlled in the US, and
following the passing of the Trans-Atlantic Partnership in 2015 the
increasing requirements to channel all fibre-optic communication
through the US or the UK so that the Global Safety Commission (a group
formed in 2016 by the merger of the US NSA and the UK GCHQ) could
ensure the safety of the Web for children and freedom from terrorist
extremist propaganda. This was optional, in theory, although all
non-routed content was not indexed by the two authorized search
engines (Google2 and Bing, by Google and Fox News respectively) and
was blocked from being accessed by non-corporate persons. The
Always-on Backup™ policy of GSC was popular, and soon became essential
when non-corporate persons were banned from using non-Cloud storage in
the wake of the Save Hollywood campaign and the Freedom from
Defamation act.

There were a few short-lived alarms - the German Chancellor complained
in 2017 when it was revealed that all internal data from European
corporations was being made available to US corporations to give them
an unfair advantage when tendering for defence contracts, but the
story was quickly forgotten. A consumer rights group claimed later
that year that backups were not 100% reliable, with strange deletions
and alteration of data, but no-one took such crackpot claims
seriously. In retrospect, though, such incidents seem to have been the
impetus for the hardening of the Brazil-Africa-India-China pipeline
that seems to have happened ahead of the Miami Incident in 2019 - an
apparent terrorist attack on the Miama data center severing the link
from the BRIC network into GSC, followed by gallant reconstruction
efforts where a replacement, higher bandwidth connection was installed
free of charge. Inexplicably, this too became severed at several
points and there were reports of armed clashes between Venezualan and
Columbian forces at repair points.

No-one really seems to know what happened next, but a year later there
was a joint declaration by Russia, China, Brazil, Venezuela and India
that they would leave the safe confines of Global Safety and
administer their own Internet2, with their own root DNS and no
connection to the "West World" Internet, as it became known. And so,
for most of us, the world continued on. Countries whose languages we
didn't speak no longer appeared in Google searches, which many saw as
a plus. W3C changed the "World Wide" to "West World", explaining the
decision as sound fiscal sense and a re-commitment towards essential
priorities.

But I guess I should press on and explain the Webkit part of the
corporate name. Again, some of you may not remember this, but at one
time there were many different browser engines. One by one, these
disappeared. Opera Presto was one of the first, abandoned as a cost
saving measure in favour of Blink. Here in Europe we noticed that,
although in the US where the Opera 5% market share was replaced by
Apple, it barely merited a mention. This was not the case for Trident,
the engine in Office IE. Microsoft, you may remember, was a major
industry player back when people used large "personal computers".
Their sudden realization in 2014 that their market share was actually
14% rather than the 90% they had assumed led to a rapid realignment
around their most popular product, Office 365. As many corporations
have done before them, they renamed themselves after their core
product. Office Bing was sold to Fox Corporation, who wanted to
safeguard fair and balanced search indexing after their brief armed
struggle with Google led to a cooling off between the two
corporations and claims of unfairly low search placement. By 2016,
reeling from a series of corporate downsizings and top-level
management shuffles, Office announced that the Trident engine would be
discontinued and that Office IE would henceforth use their own fork of
Blink, a Webkit-derived engine. This was presented as a cost-saving
and quality-assurance benefit, and also allowed Office IE to be
installed on iOS devices.

Many Web developers greeted the news with relief, as a reduced testing
burden. At W3C, there was little opposition to an emergency Process
change which redefined Candidate Recommendation to include "testing on
two or more Webkit implementations" and the name change from Web to
Webkit followed soon afterwards.

An unconfirmed rumour holds that the original Trident source code,
made available to educational institutions as a result of a 2008 EU
anti-competitive court ruling, is still in use today. The more recent
IE12 and OIE13 source code was never released, but apparently in
Brazil and Korea, IE6 lives on. Naturally I have no way to tell what
browsers are actually used over there in Eastworld.

By 2018, armed conflict between corporate persons was becoming more
widespread and in an inspired funding proposal, W3C sought and gained
approval for a peacekeeping role among warring corporations. We had
always, it was pointed out, been associated with blue helmets or blue
beanies. We had a proven track record of getting antagonistic
corporations around a negotiating table. Soon, with US and European
funding, the blue W3C flag was flying over the Palo Alto W3C
headquarters to mark out a safe, ceasefire zone for technical
innovation. It was also at that time that W3C became a corporation,
primarily to assure corporate rights and to extend them to W3C
employees and collaborators as corporate dependents. Of the various
options, we chose to incorporate under the quasi-national entity of
Google.

Having weathered these storms, and with West World Webkit finally
being an interoperable, geographically defined commodity - people
stopped caring. Mission achieved. The new battleground was a layer
above, and W3C Members steadily dropped off their membership in favour
of the JavaScriot Framework (JSF) corporation. Ironically the move to
a non-Membership corporation gave us greater freedom and neutrality to
do sound technical work, and the peacekeeper funding kept us afloat
for several years.

Now that is gone.

## Disclaimer

This is a work of fiction, produced for the W3C 2024 futures exercise.
it identifies certain key risks for W3C as an organization, and how
the global Web in which it operates might change and affect the W3C
mission.

I was intending to work in a publishing or entertainment industry
backlash against private publication (and open publication). This
would also tie in to the concept of "corporate persons" and (via
Animal Farm and "all animals are equal, but some are more equal than
others") to the gradual disenfranchisement of non-corporate persons.
Traces of this remain, but I didn't have time to really work through
the concept.

Despite all the changes described above, notice that eventually
I predicted that W3C falls because the funding dries up.

## Resources

As a futuristic work of fiction, I can't really cite sources. But I
can cite information from which a future could be extrapolated.

* [Nineteen Eighty-Four](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Nineteen_Eighty-Four)

  The split into Westworld and Eastworld was of course inspired by
  Oceania, and Eastasia Eurasia, respectively.

    The impetus for the "only Webkit" portion comes from the Opera Presto
    discontinuation, but also from earlier browsers which are no more. The
    "standardize -webkit prefixes" discussion in CSS WG was also a major
    influence.

* [Presto Is Dead; Long Live Opera! (2013)](http://www.webmonkey.com/2013/02/presto-is-dead-long-live-opera/)

    I deliberately didn't mention Firefox in the whole story. Maybe they
    became a major low-cost mobile player (which would then put them
    in EastWorld according to this narrative). Maybe they would disappear.

    I was also going to work in a "browser destroyed by clueless corporate
    buyout" angle to the Microsoft section, inspired by the fate of the
    Netscape browser under the tender ministrations of AOL. But I ran out
    of time so I made Trident disappear because of beancounters instead.

    The idea that Bing would sink after being bought by Fox was left
    implicit. But anyone remember Alta Vista?

* ['A' for Angela: GCHQ and NSA Targeted Private German Companies and Merkel (2104)](http://www.spiegel.de/international/germany/gchq-and-nsa-targeted-private-german-companies-a-961444.html)

* [NSA listed Merkel among leaders subject to surveillance](http://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/mar/29/nsa-merkel-leaders-surveillance-documents-snowden)

* [How U.S. spying cost Boeing multibillion-dollar jet contract](http://www.deccanherald.com/content/375911/how-us-spying-cost-boeing.html)

  In this case a US corporation lost out to a European one (Saab). I
  recall reading another case where Airbus lost to Boeing, but
  couldn't find it.

* [Whistleblower: NSA stores 80% of all phone calls, not just metadata - full audio (2014)](http://rt.com/news/172284-nsa-stores-calls-audio/)

* [The NSA Is Building the Country’s Biggest Spy Center (2012)](http://www.wired.com/2012/03/ff_nsadatacenter/all/)

* [Brazil Russia India China (BRIC)](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/BRIC)

* [New Submarine Fibre Optic Cable To Link BRICS Countries (2012)](http://www.techweekeurope.co.uk/news/fibre-optic-cable-brics-countries-73068)

* [BRICS countries are building a "new Internet" hidden from NSA (2013)](http://voiceofrussia.com/2013_10_28/BRICS-countries-are-building-a-new-Internet-hidden-from-NSA-7157/)

    in particular:

    The last significant weakness is that the cable will still be
    vulnerable to eavesdropping by specialized American military units
    which learned how to intercept communications on underwater cables
    during the Cold War. It is possible that constant checking and
    patrolling of the cable will be required in order to protect it from
    US intelligence agencies or from the American military.

* [The Afterfibre network in Africa](http://afterfibre.net/)

* [African Undersea Cables](https://manypossibilities.net/african-undersea-cables/)

  notice the nodal point on the south coast of England, where GCHQ is
  based.

* [Browser share in Brazil](http://clicky.com/marketshare/br/web-browsers/)

* [Browser share in Republic of Korea](http://clicky.com/marketshare/kr/web-browsers/)

  Korean banking is said to still have a hard dependency on Active X
  controls and MSIE6

* [F-Root DNS server moved to Beijing](http://www.bgpmon.net/f-root-dns-server-moved-to-beijing/)

* [Microsoft exec admits new reality: Market share no longer 90% — it’s 14% (2014)](http://www.geekwire.com/2014/microsoft-exec-admits-new-reality-market-share-longer-90-14/)

* [Microsoft to Announce Job Cuts as Soon as This Week (2014)](http://www.bloomberg.com/news/2014-07-15/microsoft-said-to-announce-job-cuts-as-soon-as-this-week.html)

* [Internet in Venezuela](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Internet_in_Venezuela)

* [Internet in Brazil](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Internet_in_Brazil)

    The idea of incorporating under a quasi-national entity rather than
    under a soverign nation was partly inspired by Neal Stephenson's nove
    Snow Crash, which features ["Franchise-Owned Quasi-National Entities"](http://www.acronymfinder.com/Franchise_Owned-Quasi_National-Entities-%28Stephenson%27s-Snow-Crash%29-%28FOQNE%29.html).

* [Corporate armies, drone terrorism, laser weapons – MoD's vision of future (2014)](http://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2014/jul/11/ministry-of-defence-vision-future-2045-security-threats)

    "Individuals may define themselves less by their nationality, with
    growing migration and stronger links to virtual communities."

    "the influence of non-state actors such as multinational corporations
    is likely to increase at the expense of nation states, and private
    companies may develop "highly capable security forces"."

* [W3C, The Blue Helmets of Cyberspace (1997)](http://www.w3.org/Press/BlueHelmets) by Rohit Khare and Sally Khudairi, W3C



